[Music]
please welcome CTO oculus John Carmack
[Applause]
[Music]
all right so I've been told that we're
not doing live Q&A here but after this
I'm just walking out onto the floor so
anybody has any questions I'll be there
the rest of the day and come up and
we'll get some answers so I I'm almost
an explicit counterpoint to a lot of the
long-term visionary talk that happens
and I it's not that it isn't important a
lot of people find a lot of great
motivation from it and some things do
need long-term commitment I am really
happy that Facebook does have this
long-term commitment to research and
development of new technologies but in
some ways a long term vision can be a
rug that you sweep your current
shortcomings under I you know if you're
not concentrating on what's right in
front of you all of the time it can be
an issue so I try to be constantly
critical and Michael Abrash and I just
serve fundamentally different purposes
inside this company yeah you know at our
last a big company off-site where there
is lots of talk about strategy and
vision and what we were doing I kind of
grumpily went back to my hotel room and
I pulled out my NGO and I started making
a list of a hundred things wrong with
our software right now and I eventually
you know came to my senses and realized
that wasn't gonna be a great thing to
just dump in one of our internal groups
and I wound up I kind of distilling it
down to something that I counted over 20
different ways that we demonstrate focus
in VR just in our first party apps when
you move the cursor on to something in
an application does it highlight does it
change the border around it does it
underline does it bold does it change
the background color does it grow wings
around it all these other possible
things and that's crazy you know we
don't need we've explored practically
every nook and cranny of the solution
space all at one time and you know why
does store look like this and gallery
look like that and some of its from
messy evolution some of these things are
four years old and evolution the way
they've come up from the original gear
VR innovator edition but some of it's
also that we've committed the sin of
kind of shipping the org chart different
teams without a whole lot of
collaboration between them and these are
things that I Fred about quite a bit you
know and there are mundane things and
you know maybe they're not the most
important thing but I think that fixing
into
little things like this is how you wind
up I think local hill-climbing
to just have better quality better
features is the best path to success now
over the weekend I went back and watched
my OC 4 keynote again and honestly there
are several things that I talked about
that I don't give us a very good grade
at following up on but I am happy to say
that what I thought was the most
important topic of discussion which was
shipping oculus go turned out really
well
and I let go a lot but more importantly
our users really liked it also and one
of the things that's kind of remarkable
here is your VR has shipped an
incredible number of units it's kind of
by far the most successful VR headset
but it hasn't really been a very sticky
product where people get it they try
some applications they give it a good
review and they like it but generally
they drift away after not too terribly
long
maybe they bring it back out for family
get-togethers to show off to show a few
people VR that haven't seen it before
but on the other hand rift is is very
retentive people come back to rift week
after week and they spend a lot of time
in it now I was probably dying the most
optimistic inside oculus about how well
go would do but it turned out that it
exceeded even my expectations i its the
remarkable point is go is retaining as
well as rift and that's pretty shocking
nobody predicted that and it's not clear
that we know exactly why there's a lot
of theories that we have about why the
experience is so different I am but the
content you're interacting with is
pretty close to the same things that you
had on the gear VR experience there are
some things that are definitely better
with go where it's a little bit more
comfortable the screens a little bit
higher resolution the optics are a bit
better maybe things that the margin just
add up maybe the 72 frames per second
display lets more people that just
couldn't stand the flicker of 60 work on
some of the applications but there
aren't that many applications that
actually run it at 72 we used to
theorize that maybe overheats on the
older phones were a really terrible
thing that drove people away but the
newer Samsung phones are quite a bit
more powerful than go and they don't
really over
so that's probably not a killer issue
also we realize later that when somebody
does overheat the phone it's probably
because they're having a great time and
they've been playing for a while so
that's not driving them away you know we
do think that there are aspects of kind
of poisonous user experiences that
happened that kind of kick people out of
the platform where most people have
probably had the experience with the
gear VR you haven't used it in a while
you say I'm gonna try something in gear
VR and you plug it into the get out the
dot phone dock it there and then it says
oh you need to undock for some update
you take it out and that kind of kills
the experience there where if you're
doing it every day it's just part of the
the process there but if that was you
had just tipped over into wanting to get
back into VR and then you got kind of
slapped with that experience that's a
bad thing
there's still cases where the user
experience degrades a bit when you're
downloading at the same time and it
starts stuttering or having other
problems so maybe these are the
poisonous things that that drive people
Alif there's also theories that just I
am people worried about draining their
phone battery that their phone that they
constant that they rely on for their
daily life that they don't want to go
ahead and pull half the charge out of it
for a VR session so that might be
something but you know whatever the
causes the go users are behaving very
differently than the gear VR users I am
demographically no huge surprises we are
strongest with somewhat older people
it's still very male-dominated the one
shock was how well we've done in Japan
where we are not catering to the
Japanese market we don't have great
internationalization for for Japanese in
the different areas but something about
go has really struck a nerve in the the
Japanese market and consciousness and so
I'm not we're still not quite sure what
we can actually do about that given all
of our I kind of structural inertia on
things but that was an interesting data
point there's some bright spots that we
hear from like teenagers that are people
that have in some ways more limited
freedom I could say that virtual reality
has more to offer them when you don't
have a lot that you a lot of control
necessarily in your life the ability to
go do things in your own virtual world
is pretty exciting and there's there's
some some interesting possibilities as
we look at lower and lower potential
price points in other areas in the world
I would say that probably one of the
reasons to the Japanese success is the
density of population when you are in a
small area being able to open up a large
virtual world is pretty freeing so the
things that we've done really well with
go the convenience I think of stand
alone is the number one most important
thing I hunted $99 price point is really
important psychologically although it's
noteworthy that the the more expensive
64 gig version actually is more popular
and more units of that get sold the
audio was a huge huge win and I mean
everybody that used a gear VR not one
person in probably 50 would plug in
headphones for an experience there so
all you got was the little mono speaker
coming out of the phone while the audio
in go it doesn't satisfy an audiophile
and people can complain about it but it
does give excellent positional 3d
stereoscopic spatialized sound and it's
just there by default it's more
convenient than the flip down rift
headphones and I I definitely gave a big
thank you to the on the team that worked
that out because I think it's one of
those really great innovations the
better thermals I'm is something that we
don't really overheat the only time I've
ever overheated a go is I when I had a
rogue thread running that didn't shut
down and I put it facedown on my desk so
that the whole front surface plate
really couldn't dissipate any heat and I
do think it was kind of a neat piece of
industrial design the whole metal front
plate that serves the the important
thermal dissipation role but it also I
think gives it a nice quality feel to
the product one of the things that was a
late addition that I was well after
oculus connect last year is the addition
of the 72 frames per second video where
we found out fairly early on that we had
some margin for raising the I am for
raising the refresh rate and the reason
you want to do this are because 60
frames per second is flickery for some
people it varies from person to person
but for some people it's almost
unwatchable and some people hardly
notice it but the other point for 72
precisely is that as three times the the
standard 24 frames per second movie rate
so a lot of things on Netflix or in the
movie theater have a smoother release
rate when you can kind of exactly hit
that number now that was a bit of a
struggle internally because the I am the
displays are specified they've got specs
for different by different ranges of
conditions and the hardware engineers
are much more conservative than software
engineers where I as a software engineer
I'm like they just say well let's just
see what happens and that just kind of
gives sends shivers down the spines of a
lot of the hardware people so we did a
lot of testing with it and there are
some edge cases where the the issue at
LCD displays is that their temperature
sensitive
so the cooler it is the slower the LCD
is I kind of change state from one state
to another and if you left if you left
to go out in a car in Wisconsin in the
winter and then brought it into your
house and turned it on you are very
likely going to see multiple ghosts on
the screen as its incapable of changing
completely from one one state to another
but in most normal cases inside houses
it works fine and in fact we've got a
little bit more margin it would be
possible for us to raise it a little
more but I don't think there's any sweet
spots I kind of above that where we
can't go all the way to 120 Hertz and
the difference between 72 Hertz and 80
it would be worse for the video cases
and I think the fraction of people that
that makes a critical difference for
would be really small and it would be a
lot more power drain to be rendering
that much faster so the I another thing
that was ready by the end was the faux
v8 adrenix tension and this is another
great example of how having everything
in-house was a huge win for us we're
multi-view rendering I had been talking
about probably as an idea at OC one and
then again at two three and four and it
took us over two years to get that
through from the time that here's the
plan here's the extension to the point
where developers could really rely on it
and that was just because of these
structural issues where Qualcomm and arm
had to both develop the extensions work
them out bicker about how to do the
different different cases where it's
better for one platform or the
their Samsung has to pick that up get it
into their next release then it has to
go to all the carriers and they have to
decide when they're going to allow that
to go to their customers and it was
pretty miserable I mean that was a real
learning experience for me that it could
take that long
in contrast the faux v8 adrenix tension
was something that we did directly with
qualcomm since there's only one chipset
i in the go and we worked it out we got
it in there our OS team integrated it
and it shipped and everything worked
great and that was a you know a solid
little performance improvement it's not
huge but it's 15 percent or so in many
cases and in a lot of cases that's the
difference that allows you to go ahead
and run it 72 frames per second instead
of 60 but there are a bunch of things
that I'm not super happy with with go
like the the split back strap on go was
intended to support different hair
styles there are people that I that the
standard over the back is strip just
didn't work very well for and so
splitting like that would allow a bun or
whatever to fit through in between but
what it wound up doing is unloading the
top straps so if the top strap is
connected to them I am the over the head
strap is connected to the top part of
the split it just lifts up and down and
it can't take much of the weight from
that and I've seen some people actually
pulling the strap all the way down to
the bottom one so you can get it behind
your head and I don't think we hit the
right thing with that I am you can't
actually take a gear VR strap and with a
little bit of scissor work on it I get
it to fit inside a go I have the
conventional one back strap and also on
that note I am the facial interface it
drip I'm the bottom of it extends kind
of below the plastic part which is
somewhat important on the side on the
cheeks but it's not a good thing around
your nose where if it's depending on
where it's sitting on your face it might
actually be reflecting some of your
breath back at you and that's another
thing I pulled off the facial interface
and take the scissors to it and cut
around the nose there as a slight
modification I am right around that same
area one of the things that I complained
immediately when I saw the prototypes of
go was the amount of light leakage
around the nose where is basically a
RRIF design and I really like the fact
that gear VR
very tight light leakage and very little
light leakage around there you can
immerse yourself pretty fully while with
rift or goes I am space around the nose
you can kind of see all the light down
there you can move your hand and see it
like that and for a truly immersive
experience like if you were if you had
that in something like the void that
would completely destroy the experience
but I've been pretty surprised to see a
lot of our user studies people coming
back and so many people think that that
was the intentional design to let you
kind of peek at your hand and peek at
different things and I may be coming
around to that being maybe a wash it
hurts on the immersion but a lot of
people do like that little bit of extra
being able to see through their eye one
of our things that has clearly failed in
a lot of ways is the proximity sensor
where the idea with the standalone is
you pick it up you put it on your head
and you're magically into VR immediately
but we had so many problems with the
straps on the back the very soft straps
falling down into the face of that where
that becomes a it triggers the proc
sensor and we've got all these
heuristics about well even though the
proc sensor is triggered it hasn't moved
in this long we think it's idle we'll
turn it off so the battery doesn't run
down but it also means that a lot of
times you pick it up and you do have to
manually turn on the hit the power
switch and it's in almost a worst-case
scenario now where you have to worry
about it not doing it when you eye you
set it down and running down your
battery a little bit or not immediately
coming up when you put it on so we're
probably going to be putting in a
setting option for this where a setting
that lets you just say ignore the proc
sensor require the power power button to
be pressed which is one of the things
that a lot of people in business and
location-based systems really want they
want people to not have to worry about
that and also the recenter dialog where
a lot of installations want to basically
have here put this headset on and see
our IR movie our 360 immersive media and
whatever and we if we add those two
settings and you can say turn off the
proximity sensor and turn off the
recenter dialog then you can write
software that does just on mount restart
it do simple things like that and that
should be a really useful thing now
since we shipped go we've already had a
number of improvements we shipped big
new apps with
menus and TV one of the things that got
announced at the keynote yesterday that
it's kind of a geeky I have detour on
this but I'm super proud of the way the
new chromatic aberration correction
stuff got worked out that I am we had
chromatic aberration correction on the
very first gear VR it was an option you
could set on the flags and we set it on
a number of our early applications but
as we were moving to the later phones we
turned it off of most things because it
was a power issue and it did make things
a little bit slower and we had some
tearing issues and all this so for the
most part on gear VR where the optics
got pretty blurry quickly away from the
center where chromatic aberration starts
really showing up I am I thought it was
a fair trade to just leave it off get
the performance and battery life but we
were a little bit taken aback when the
early go reviews and some of the the
press reviews started coming in and
people were talking about the chromatic
aberration that was visible on it and
sometimes they didn't know the actual
terms but we could tell what they were
talking about about color shifts and
rainbows and things like that of the
coroner that it was the chromatic
aberration correction and we had a
little bit of a mini panic internally
about our decisions on were we doing the
right thing with this and I did a pretty
extensive write-up about here are all
the different trade offs for games and
most typical things it's usually worth
it it's maybe a millisecond to turn on
the old chromatic aberration correction
a lot of games that's the very best
quality performance trade-off you can
make if you have margin if you don't
have that millisecond of course you're
better to not drop frames and not have
chromatic aberration correction but if
you've got some margin that was usually
the first thing I would tell people to
add the problem was in our core VR shell
application and anything that used time
warp layers which was one of my keys to
this high quality experience that we
were providing the text that you could
read the the crystal-clear movies and
all this the problem with that was when
you composed multiple layers with the
chromatic aberration correction it
couldn't do it properly because there
was one alpha Channel it would draw one
layer and then it would blend the next
one on top of it but it had to have the
color spread out and there was only one
alpha to blend so you would wind up like
you could turn it on on browser and the
text would then look better but you
would have an even
chromatic aberration artifact at the
edges where it faded out because it
couldn't properly blend them together
now there's obviously ways to fix this
qualcomm has a I am an extension called
frame buffer fetch where you could go
and go ahead and read the frame buffer
and do the blending in your fragment
shader and that worked but it was
hideously slow they had another
extension on top of that non-coherent
frame buffer fetch which made it faster
because we knew we weren't overlapping
things that we were drawing but it was
still like three milliseconds which is
way too much for this I am the way rift
does chromatic aberration correction is
it renders composites everything
together ignoring that then it corrects
it to another buffer with a full read I
could do that on the mobile systems but
that turned out to be four milliseconds
of time you know a quarter of your frame
time just to do that like this because
the mobile are especially hurt by these
high bandwidth memory operations like
reading the whole 32 bit uncompressed
and writing it back out you know there
were a few more at last-ditch things we
could have done there's another thing
the hardware could have done called
blend func extended but I eventually had
an idea that seemed potentially
interesting and that was there's a whole
section of silicon on these these chips
that we don't use for much of anything
at all that's the display processing
unit that does all the upscaling of
videos and compositing things over
wallpapers and all the normal thing is
that 2d phones do to keep from having
the GPU do it and I thought that you
know it can do stretching of different
things if we wrote out a separate red
green and blue image it could stretch
and stretch the red a little stretch the
blue a little and leave the green the
same put them all together and it would
work great but unfortunately writing out
all three of those different ones from
the GPU with so much memory overhead
that was also three or four milliseconds
completely unusable I but what I thought
is if there was some way that we could
just write out our normal thing
pretending like we were not doing CAC at
all and then if the DP you could be
configured somehow waving hands Kurt
madly to take one channel from here and
one channel from there and one channel
from this as three separate windows
point three windows at this and MUX it
up somehow that that
could then magically fix everything now
of course it doesn't do this in the spec
the spec for the hardware
I am composer from Android doesn't
require anything like that but I got
with the Qualcomm people that we worked
very closely with and I laid out the
idea and said this would be great if we
could make this work could you maybe you
know give me all of the low-level
hardware register specs on this and let
me just see if I could come up with
anything that could work and they didn't
wind up giving me all the the register
specs of it but they did wind up
basically going down the hall to the
guys that built it the dpu and said is
there any way to get this working and it
turned out there was completely
undocumented hardware that's not used
for anything else but they're possible
to set the muxes this different way and
then all of a sudden we've got the
ability to do this so we now have the
ability to have the GPU pretend
chromatic aberration doesn't exist in
this whole separate part of silicon on
the chip magically solves this for us
now it still does have some memory
bandwidth overhead because it's reading
the buffer three times but it's not
writing back out to it so it doesn't
cost anything on performance really but
it does cost a little bit on battery and
the initial plan was that we were going
to a be test this it's a couple percent
I am but everybody that's one you've
been using this for a while has just
been really clear this is absolutely
worth it so I think the plan now is that
we are just going to roll it out
directly to everybody I am but that ties
in with another feature that we're gonna
be getting as a setting that's been
requested is a low-power mode a mode you
know a way that we could stretch the
battery a little bit more on go where
the things that we're gonna be doing on
that are forcing the chromatic
aberration off I am forcing it to a
thirty Hertz 3d rendering update I am
and also one thing we're probably going
to wind up putting though I am putting
them display brightness down as well and
also turning it to 60 frames per second
so it's basically turning it more like
into a previous generation gear VR and
this will get you you know so maybe
it'll be another 15 minutes of video
time or something people would really
only do this if you're gonna be sitting
back watching a video I'm not
interacting too much with it another
broadly requested feature is USB storage
some way to extend the storage from the
go and it's a little bit of a
Bagon this where it turns out we do have
some hardware limitations and there's
some software licensing issues so this
is not the ideal feature that we might
want to have but we are going to wind up
releasing this I am so that you can plug
in little micro USB is it's limited to
fat32 support so your load a four gig
file so though you can format it still
for very large very large drives but we
do have a hardware problem that we have
no workaround for we're at low battery
levels sometimes the plugging in the USB
we can't mount it correctly and it's
just it's not a perfect feature but I
think it's still worthwhile shipping to
users because a lot of people will like
this although it's also surprising how
much power those little USB keys can
draw out of the main battery so it does
take a fair bit of your battery away I'm
night mode is another little feature
that somebody suggested it I prototyped
it that day and we're still just kind of
waiting for a setting to make its way
through all of our UI to get that out to
users one of the most exciting features
is the the casting that was talked about
on them on the keynote and everybody
knows the problem of trying to give
demos from a gear VR previously or ago
where you're kind of guessing what the
person is looking at trying to tell them
it's like no that thing down on the
bottom look over there press this button
and it's difficult to run somebody
through a demo and then of course it's
the whole isolating aspect of it and
when I the mirroring to your phone
really does change that it's remarkable
I had the experience recently just
showing my my kids thumper for the first
time and watching on my phone while they
were going through it and giving him a
little bit of coaching tips there really
did change the experience so I think
this is gonna be a really big win for us
now there's some other things that I'm
thinking about as possible futures like
I am possibly the ability to make your
phone act as a controller for those
times when you forgot the gear VR the
gear the go controller somewhere else
which I've done and had to drive back to
another house to go get it to be able to
make a demo at some point being able to
just use your phone as a surrogate
controller or possibly even as a
surrogate joypad which would then unlock
a lot of the joypad games is interesting
one of the features that I think I've
come around on is
we have this notion of bed mode which
started in like Netflix having the void
theater and are void theater that you
could move the the screen around and we
generalize that a little bit inside
shell so we gave you the stable
environment but you could put any panel
looking any way anywhere you want and
this does turn out to be really one of
the superpowers of VR I mean it seems
very kind of mundane but just being able
to put screens at orientations that you
can't do with physical objects in the
real world in most cases is really
powerful but then everybody says well I
want this for you know for all of my
applications and I have fought against
this for years in that I I remember in
my early days of VR experimentation if
you have the world 20 degrees off in a
vertical it's extraordinarily
discomforting and you move through that
and the world is all tilted and I just
figured that was one of the worst things
we could do for comfort but it does turn
out we have a lot of apps that don't
involve moving through the world or at
least looking around and navigating and
an argument could be made that all of
those video or media applications that
don't implement avoid theater mode
explicitly on their own might be better
off being able to just reset the
vertical directly I and I took I like I
did an experiment with a random Reese
entering and I I played a game that
doesn't require looking around I played
smash hit for a while just plowing
through while I was on the floor looking
up at the ceiling and that worked fine
that I it was okay but when I
experimented with some other apps that
had AI that had a real sense of a world
with a vertical and you're looking
around a little bit I did feel a little
bit odd
after I when I came out of VR and the
reference was changed so we have not run
this all through complete user testing
but people have been asking for this for
years and I think my position is
softening on it as maybe a net value and
Reese entering brings up one of the
points where we did come around to
basically doing what daydreamed is does
with aya with Reese entering I think
they made the right call in retrospect
where the recenter operation by default
Reese enters not just your controller
but also your view unless the
application explicitly opts out I am we
had long debates about this but I think
that is the right call and
and there's a couple other little things
that we've cribbed from daydream I added
a little thumbprint on the controller
that they do I try to try it every time
I I kind of take a hint from them I try
to do it a little bit better I've got a
really nice cursor trails with busy aq
I'm odd retic Bezier curves on it that
I'm waiting for again another setting to
turn on this is a theme for this where
I've got all these things where they're
gated on you I in many cases right now
we're trying to make this a priority to
make it easier to get some of these
little things in but I think that one of
the really gratifying things to me is
that the problems that people have with
go right now they tend to be real-world
problems rather than kind of VR geek
problems it's like the battery doesn't
last long enough or it doesn't charge
fast enough I not you know how do I do
an expressive emote from my from my
avatar inside a VR application these are
the same types of things that people
complain about about every application
or every kind of piece of consumer
electronics so I am and that does we had
we did not have a really clear strategy
at go launch for exactly what go was
supposed to be who it was supposed to be
for and we have crystallized that a lot
more now where go is our device that is
80 percent media 20 percent gaming quest
on the other hand is exactly the
opposite
eighty percent gaming 20 percent media
and there's reason there's good reasons
why things are slightly different
between these for the media case like
with the the bed mode and love putting
things on the ceiling it turns out that
screams are really you know this is what
we do with almost everything during our
days the I've said there's over a
trillion dollars of that's been put into
media that we watch on screens the
things we watch on movie theaters TV
screens phones computers tablets all of
these different devices so it's crazy to
think that those aren't also going to be
important inside VR and making making
changes and strategic decisions around
implementations around that is I think a
viable direction and as almost sort of a
response to some of the visionary stuff
I did make one vision pitch internally
I'd say that all that we really need
here is screens and people if all that
VR did and it can do so much more but if
all that it did was make amazing screens
and allowed you to be Co present with
other people while doing that that would
be an enormous value for the world we
could be providing value with that while
we're slowly growing these brand new
immersive class of applications that
don't have precedents before you know
there's so many things that you can do
with that obviously everybody likes the
giant screens in there they like being
able to put them bed mode up on you know
on the ceiling in theory we can do
things like this can be more ergonomic
like whenever I see people hunched over
laptops or tablets working that's not
the best way to be working you want to
have a nice upright posture looking at
things we can make the screens at a
distance where your eyes converge at
them naturally rather than in forced
focus direction now obviously we don't
have the resolution that I that we would
like for this today you can't replace a
4k monitor or my 330 inch monitors that
you have it the desktop but we're not as
far off as I thought we might be for
being able to replace a lot of these
other things clearly people are watching
a lot of TV and movies in the system
right now I'll talk about it later one
of the other major projects that I did
this last year was really attacking the
virtual desktop approach and that turned
out better than I expected and there's
some good learnings from that but so if
we were to take some of these strategic
directions and thinking's and were to
design a next-generation go the
trade-offs are kind of interesting to
think about relative to what we do on
quest in different things obviously the
top one is better battery life now you
can get that from literally having a
bigger battery or a battery of a higher
spec or we can get it by having more
advanced silicon that's more power
efficient writing better code doing lots
of things cutting the bloat out of it
but also faster charging I it's great to
hear that people have a device that
they're upset that they've used go
earlier and it's not fully charged up
because they want to use it again that's
a good problem to have you know comfort
we can still make we can still make very
large strides on I don't think that we
as a company have really taken that as a
top-line priority it's all been about
packing
technology and then somehow wrapping a
comfortable shape around that technology
but if we start getting to a point where
we're willing to sacrifice some
technology in some cases in the name of
comfort for a lot of people that's going
to be the right trade-off I still think
that there are exciting things with
ultra lightweight displays and I am you
know it's great to see people physically
hacking with goes it's a good platform
for that because it's mostly
self-contained there you can carve away
plastic and there's some great stuff
that people have done I'm making more
comfortable like changing it to halo
straps cutting away a lot of the weight
these are kind of exciting things that
I've been chastising some of our
internal teams it's like get with the
program or some you know some guy in a
garage is going to outdo us on the
important comfort metrics obviously more
storage in I internally so you can store
more videos although USB helped
certainly fixing the problem so it works
I across-the-board and reliably but very
interesting to come to questions about
six degree of freedom tracking 4k
displays I am you know really good
tracked controllers these are all pure
goods if they don't have costs but they
do have costs they trade off in power
draw I am you know an expense for the
product development time on some of
these things so it's not completely
clear I I think that one of the problems
that people do have with go is course
controller drift you know the reefs
entering that is a completely unnatural
action for people to have to do it's a
failure of the product that the
controller does not stay pointing the
way your hand is pointing I that may be
actually one of the stronger reasons
even if somebody does nothing but sit in
Netflix with an AI application like this
having the controller always there
instead of coming back an hour later and
it's off screen and you need to remember
to reset her to bring it in to you in
front of you that's a good argument for
having cameras and some kind of tracking
as well as of course the thing that if
you're used to VR you know you just kind
of sit there and let the head model do
its work but somebody else is there
they're like oh I'm in this the ski
lodge I'm gonna lean forward and look at
that magazine and that's incredibly
uncomfortable when you don't have six
degree of freedom tracking I am
resolution wise honestly by this point I
expected us to have 4k displays but the
phone industry made the surprise
rational choice that 4k displays don't
actually matter in that form factor for
anything I expected specs men ship and
the kind of warfare there to carry it
over well past the point of rationality
but it turned out not to be the case I
am but still so VR companies are gonna
have to foot the bill for those next
generation of display density increases
and they're there in the pipeline it'll
be interesting to see exactly which
products they they wind up landing in I
then another thing with cameras is pan
tracking do we do we want the controller
at all if all you're doing is selecting
movies and a few different things like
this but hand tracking has significant
I'm computational costs as well and you
get into some of the ones that become
almost go specific like the idea of do
we want an ambient light sensor so that
we can tell that you're using it in a
darkroom and you don't want the screen
blasting you because turns out that's a
real-world use case a lot of people you
know in our user studies we've had
people that say yes I use my go when I
I'm sitting in bed my wife is asleep and
I want to you know browse the web or
something while I without disturbing
them and that's something that I isn't
unusual it's not something we expected
as a common use case but people are
actually doing that another one like
sunburn protection it is an issue that
if you take a go nice flat face you set
it down on a picnic table the leaves
blow out of the way the Sun shines down
and you basically burned a hole in your
LCD screen and that's we have warnings
about this and we've strengthened these
warnings but it is happening to people
this is something that if you use this
device as a part of your life you're
carrying it around you're setting it
down in places even setting it down by a
window with the Sun streaming straight
in can be a problem there's technical
fixes that we can do for this I you know
people have proposed putting an LCD
layer that could darken on top of this I
am maybe it is a matter though the front
face shouldn't be flat so you're not
ever inclined to set it down like that
there's there's other possibilities but
I'm so go was originally a side project
quest was started before go existed and
we had this notion that oh it'll just be
like a gear VR and it'll be easy and of
course it wasn't and it was
an enormous amount of work and we didn't
ship it when we initially hoped we would
but I'm still very happy that we did
that but most of the focus now has
switched over to getting quest out the
door and in many ways quest is the VR
device that people dreamed about it's
the standalone six degree of freedom
tracked with them I am with the hand
presence on the controllers and it does
all of this light people want but it's
twice the price of go I am you know it
has there's a lot more stuff there it's
a heavier headset and there's we haven't
had time to feedback in most of them the
learnings that we had from go because
these projects were all kind of going
simultaneously one thing that did come
back in we learned some from the go
facial interface work that Quest is and
is adopting kind of earlier ones were
less comfortable than the later ones
that have come out but that the real bet
on this is that the six degree of
freedom tracked headset and controllers
the kind of rift parody on this is a
magical point for people that this is
something that's going to radically
change things now when we were
originally making this call this was
before go even existed and we had no
sense that that the mobile form factor
and go could even reach the levels of
retention that you know that we did hit
the only thing that we knew worked was
rift eye and the idea was well we're
gonna bring the qualities that we think
are important from rift down to mobile I
there are things that if we were kind of
from scratch right now we would probably
do different with this focus where if we
knew this was I 80 percent gaming 20
percent media like one of the tre one of
the important things on go is that we
knew this lying down prone position for
void theater was important so a soft
back strap was really important i
ideally we'd love to be able to chuck
some weight back there like the very
first santa cruz showing that we had a
couple years ago all of the compute was
in the back of it and it was nicely
balanced with that but you had this big
lump back there there was no way you
could lean back on things and there were
problems with the cable all that but
that is an argument that somebody could
make where if you're saying this is a
gaming oriented device we want people
bobbing and weaving around for that
loading something onto the back of the
headset in the future probably does make
some good
I am but getting six degree of freedom
tracking is going to unlock VR for a
good segment of people where we still
don't have rigorous numbers about what
fraction of the population can't
tolerate $3 aking that really does need
that but we know they exist there's
people inside Facebook I ran oculus even
that like oh I get immediately sick when
I use go after a very little amount of
time just they move their head in a
certain way that's sitting on their face
in a certain way I'm those people should
generally be able to to wear a quest
because it will respond properly unless
they're in experiences like 360 videos
where you don't have any response from
the tracking eye but if it turns out
like the best case the home run scenario
on this is that we carry over all of the
goodness of the rift experiences all of
the convenience of go how to bring it
all together bringing in the people that
could never use the mobile experiences
before and that could be really great
but I am on the other hand we know sixth
off alone isn't magic because the Lenovo
solo is I it has competent sixth off
tracking we think ours is better we
think you can test it and find out
different ways that that they perform
differently but it functions and I am
you know when that has not seemed to be
a magic bullet for them to be able to to
reach tons of people so is it the
controllers that are going to be magic
is it going to be the software
specifically that we can bring over from
the rift you know we really don't know
yet now one point that that I don't
think has been really clearly stated is
that quest is being presented as a more
premium product obviously it costs more
cost twice as much but that does mean
that the curation at the store is going
to be more rigorous so the people that
have been having trouble with the gear
or go stores i am should steer clear of
development on quests now I'm often sort
of the first line of customer support
sometimes on Twitter and I have fielded
several life several times when
disgruntled developers say it's like you
know the store rejects might rejected my
application or they dropped this and
they're upset for various reasons and I
will usually get keys from them and I
will look at their application and so
far every time I have come back and said
well I am
stand but the store probably did make
the right decision where your your
application here is not kind of additive
to the entire store ecosystem and I try
to offer some constructive criticism
about you know how you could possibly
bring it to a high enough level to kind
of get over the bar and get into the
store and it is something that I still
I'm frustrated with but I understand why
it is the way it is that our store
ingestion team can't really give that
same feedback I am I'm in a position
where I can do my app reviews I can do
that my public app critiques I can give
people these kind of one-off feedback
and it's generally taken you know fairly
well I mean I'm spending my time to try
to help you out and everybody gets it
but I am our store team generally
doesn't feel that they've got a position
where they can say no this app does all
of these things wrong therefore we're
rejecting it because we know from other
people and other ecosystems that have
done things like this that what happens
is the developer comes back and says
well I did a B C and D just like you
told me to put it in the store now and
then they get told well it's still not
good enough I and that's that can be a
kind of toxic situation where it winds
up with people railing on the internet
and not good for anybody I I still hope
hold out hope that we could get some
kind of a basic checklist where
everybody could say this is not you
don't get in if you do these but you
definitely don't get in if you don't do
these because there are still a large
fraction of the apps that I think just
missed some of these checkbox items
these things that that should be just
nobody even gets you don't even get
considered if you don't have 4x MSAA
turned on today and sometimes we still
do kind of let things slip like that now
the magical play experience of room
scale or arena scale or world scale I
mean all of this freedom here is
incredibly amazing just last night I am
after slide 8 or 9 o'clock in the
evening
somebody was showing me something that
had been built in quill that was like a
20 foot by 30 foot section this giant
sketch and we were down on the lower
level of the conference and Convention
Center nobody was around just sketched
out a giant guardian thing
put it inside put me inside it and I
walked over to another room walked back
got down on my hands and knees and
crawled through a crawl way into another
room you know looked up inside this
aquarium and this is amazing you know
this isn't this is the magic of VR this
is kind of what people imagine doing but
the reality is very rarely do you have
this twenty by thirty foot open space
that you can that you can take advantage
of experiences like this in and you know
and I chuckle whenever we have our
promotional stuff where you have people
of you athletic people swinging around
wildly and ducking and bending I with VR
where that's not gonna be the reality of
the way people are using this product
most of the time and I you know making
company strategic decisions around your
development around that might not be the
wisest thing where it's gonna be a niche
thing at one one direction I one way of
thinking about things that I saw
somebody start talking about this year
was that a lot of VR rides are like
amusement park rides they're like a
roller coaster and the classic VR thing
is the bending and diving and chucking
things that is in some ways like this
experience that people go to and it's
exciting but you don't necessarily want
to be doing that every day or even every
week I and that's why while we say 80/20
split gaming media I'm pretty much
telling people don't be surprised when
people still wind up watching a lot of
movies and TV shows inside this and it's
more than 20% I'm I had said before how
at the very start of oculus I had bet
someone else that it's gonna be more
than 50% of the time not in games and
I've you know I've been smug about
winning that can pretty decisively for a
while but a new data point that came out
about a year ago that I was pretty
shocked about was that even game
consoles like you take a ps4 average
users spend about half their time
watching movies and things using that as
their I their set-top box replacement or
their DVD player blu-ray player so while
gaming is the the kind of boutique who
it's the marquee thing it's the thing
that brings people in and they will make
a decision one way or the other but
one of the mundane stuff does wind up
eating up a lot of the time that people
wind up spending there and then I do
worry that in many ways it does come
down to people tend towards a little bit
of laziness and inaction I mean this is
what gave us the couch potato and all of
this
and while VR can be touted as the
antidote to the couch potato it gets up
makes you active I talked to somebody
here yesterday that was very involved in
basically Fitness VR stuff and first I
was like well don't you have a lot of
fogging problems and they said not
really surprisingly little and that VR
can be really great for this sort of
exercise but I am dubious about it
changing a lot of people's habits where
I was disappointed in past years that I
couldn't even get people to stand up or
spin around in a swivel chair to play
games with gear VR you know people
generally wanted to just sit down inert
one direction and move their thumbs
instead of moving their body and that's
something to to keep in mind you know
it's gonna be great to have these
athletic superstar events I wear it
looks amazing but if we want to sell
millions and millions to people it's
gonna be a lot of people that may still
just want to sit down and move their
thumbs in some way in terms of RAW
processing power there's always a lot of
hedges and I and if but when you're
discussing different things but Quest is
in the neighborhood of the power of a
previous gen like Xbox 360 or ps3 now
and just in terms of CPU and GPU what
you can expect to do on it but the
important thing to keep in mind is that
most games on that generation rendered a
1280 by 720 view at 30 frames per second
and most of them did not have their good
anti-aliasing while in VR we're hoping
that you can render at 1280 by 1280
twice for stereo and 72 frames per
second which is eight and a half times
more pixels than you would have on an
old 360 game plus you want to be in 4x
MSAA and trilinear filtering which are
some percentages additional on top of
that so there it is not possible to take
a game that that was done at a high
quality level like a triple-a title for
that generation expect it to look like
that in VR it's too many more pixels to
rendering on the upside we do have far
more texture memory and far more main
memory in general than you had on those
platforms so some of the development can
be easier and in many cases you can
trade really rich textures for complex
shaders and in multi pass rendering in
different ways and essentially
realistically we are going to wind up
competing with the Nintendo switch as a
device where I don't think there's gonna
be that many people that say I'm not
gonna buy a ps4 I'm gonna buy a quest
instead I think we're gonna have people
that like I'm a gamer I've gotten you
know my brand of choice for the main
console maybe got a PC I play games on
I'm going to pick up a quest as a mobile
device I'm very much like the switches
right now so I do stand by the statement
that I've made that the core magic of
any rift experience can be brought to
this but you can't ignore the level of
processing power differences well I'd
say it's I am it's a big high-end PC can
use up to 500 watts of power and
something like this is earning 5
something you know a little bit more
there's almost a factor of a hundred
difference in the total power but really
in any game you're only generally
concentrating on a half-dozen or so
things there's some psychology behind
though how many things your mind can
focus on and while there are some games
and experiences that need thousands of
something for its aesthetic that's not
the thing that's going to work I am well
on quest but when you've got something
here I am moving an environment these
other things are moving my hands are
tracked here on performing actions at
some rate all of that can come through
but in main it may need a different
programming style than then what's been
what's been necessary or possible on the
PC we're outside of triple-a productions
PC development is really pretty nice
right now you've got so much power kind
of to burn in at your disposal that you
don't have to be hardcore hotshot
Technical Program or to do an amazing
game that people love because you can't
afford to do things in a way that's easy
for you that's convenient for your
design
you don't really have that convenience
on any mobile platform really but
especially on a mobile VR platform where
we've got so much other things that you
need to do beyond just rendering the
cell phone screen there's I you know
I've given a couple talks already at
them I on the app reviews in the start
session now I'll go back over some of
that work here but and then I'm in again
in the hallways to offer advice for the
rest of the day there are lists of
things that you can start doing if you
take your rift game and if you're using
unity or unreal there's a decent chance
you'll be able to click a little magic
checkbox and have it compile for quest
I am the odds of it actually running
well initially are near zero there's
almost no application that I was run on
the PC that would come out and run
properly on quest at that point but
there are some applications that that
had a mobile-friendly aesthetic that
could be brought over with not too much
work that came down to just making sure
you're hitting the right buttons turning
the right knobs and doing the right
settings but unfortunately most
applications are going to require more
surgery than it will require that if a
rethink of the way you handle things a
rethink of what you're doing in the game
where if you take a game down to its
schematic elements you're looking at
this action is producing this feedback
in this response now this feedback could
be you know an immense particle system
with dynamic lighting and fragment
models spraying out in a mobile game
that might turn into enabling one
surface of a muzzle flash I am but I
have seen games that do this high-end
throw lots of particles and other stuff
coming out of the front that are worse
user experiences than just throwing the
one flash of muzzle flash up there in
the right position so there's tons of
wisdom in past generations of game
devices you know if you go back to the
earlier generations like the ps1 or
newer games like the Nintendo DS these
are games where people have done
landmark games that people have loved
for decades with far far more limited
power than what you've got with a quest
so I mean these were you're talking tens
of
Hertz processors in some cases vs. and
we go well over a gigahertz on the the
processing rates here so it's certainly
possible but many people that are into
gaming in the last five years as
developers have never had to exercise
these muscles now I always recommend
that it's good for you to go ahead and
learn about all of this but the I the
other option is to just find the right
partners you know partner up to the
right game designers with the right
technical people and that's been a path
to great success it might mean expanding
your team or forming different
connections but that's I in many cases
you'll have to do that to get the same
to not have horrible compromises made as
you're bringing things over so some of
the things that just go right out the
window is forget about any kind of
dynamic shadow mapping it's like yes
it's possible to make it happen and work
on mobile but that is the last thing you
need to be focusing on if you need
something to say give grounding to
characters blend the little blurry blob
underneath them like games have done for
so long shadow mapping is just one
example of these secondary or tertiary
rendering passes which again it's
possible in almost all of these there
are all these caveats like yes you can
do a game that does this but it's
probably not a good idea
learn the rules before you decide to
break the rules here anything else that
causes an additional render certainly
any invite dynamic environment mapping
but also many secondary screen renders
inside environments these are things
that that are going to you will pay for
them trying to do them on the mobile
systems the first thing that I do when I
look at an application for performance
is I start a snapdragon profiler as
usually my tool of choice and it's it
comes with a whole lot of caveats i am
it is not the most reliable piece of
software because it has to work across
or it has to attempt to work across
every every different phone and tablet
that uses that so it's not specialized
for anything and it does have a tendency
to kind of go up or down on different
features across releases but over the
last three or four years it has had some
solid positive improvements and it
pretty much mostly works for me on go
most of the time i'm so first thing i do
is i start that up i run the application
get into some place in the game where
it's
not performing well and I take a live
trace and I look at how often how much
the GPU is being used and kind of in
what blocks I'm because the first thing
I look for is if you see multiple GPU
blocks happening inside each frames like
Oh their rendering something off here
what is it I can look through the other
captures to try to find out what it is
but that's the first thing that you
start you stop doing is get down so that
you're passing one set of geometry
through multi-view to generate your two
stereo eyes and that's by far the best
path the path that you want to be on the
second thing that I start looking at is
going over and look at the resources
that are going on that are being used a
lot of times on PC you have uncompressed
32 bit textures which are in many cases
six or seven times slower than the
better compressed textures on mobile and
this early like in the early days of
gear VR this was almost every
application I was going through sent
compress your textures compress your
textures I've been happy to find in you
know in recent years like last year or
so more often than not now the gear and
go developers have gotten the message
and generally have the properly
compressed textures and that that has
helped a lot but I'm expecting an influx
of new riff developers into this space
that need to learn the lessons again
where you want to be using on our
platform ASTC texture compression the
default in many cases is etc' which
doesn't compress quite as well and
doesn't have a lot of the flexible
options this is one of the great things
about having a fairly constrained
platform if you're an Android developer
in some cases you would make three
different sets of compressed textures
you'd make a power VR texture
compression 1pv RTC you'd make et Cie
and you make a STC I've for go and I
inquest you just make a STC you've got a
lot of flexibility there most people I
say just pick the four bit per pixel one
like ASTC 6x6 it's equivalent to what
you're probably used to with txt or et
Cie and it'll wind up looking better but
the better developers now are going
through and making custom decisions on a
per texture basis like this low
frequency cloud Ben can be two bits per
pixel this one I chose artifacts I want
it to be perfect I'll put this up to
eight so you've got a really nice
granularity
there with the slider there are some
things that you just can't I you just
can't make work directly on quests like
a lot of the quill astray shion's where
they've painted out these beautiful
things like dear Angelica or something
that has tens of millions of triangles
in some cases and you just can't render
ten million triangles on quest the setup
unit cannot do that many you actually
can render a few million if you're very
careful and you do all the right formats
and and you set everything up correctly
but it comes back to its absolutely
possible to capture that look and feel
if somebody goes back in and knows
they've got a budget and a talented
artist says well I've got this many
triangles as my limit you can capture
basically the same thing so much of
quill is about doing things very rapidly
and fluidly you know turning out
something in a couple days that is this
environment that would have taken far
longer to model but that trade-off that
convenience comes at this trade-off of
it is not a very efficient use of
polygons probably if we have medium
model rendering or something like that
we'll have similar problems there now
unfortunately we still aren't seeing
massive wins that we kind of hoped for
out of Vulcan as the the API advancement
part of that's because I'm the multi
view for OpenGL was a huge win it took
us two and a half years or whatever to
get it really rolled through but that
made a big big difference it cut in half
a lot of the software overhead for
drawing the rendering and while unity
and unreal have Vulcan backends now that
are much more efficient they wind up
coming through to about the efficiency
of the multi view right now now we're
expecting soon to have a multi view
Vulcan extension that will bring that
back down and hopefully get us to the
point where in theory you can get about
2x improvement if you're don't have much
other software overhead versus the the
actual graphics api's but it's also
taken us a very long time to get the
interoperability between I am between
Vulcan and our compositor back-end so
that's that's in theory working right
now but I don't think we actually have
any shipped shipped applications using
it we had a couple brave developers that
were
cheering to build a project with that
which will be I have an interesting but
probably somewhat painful learning
experience as we kind of find some more
of the dark corners there one of the
things that quest opens up that we
haven't had really the ability to do
before is because it has these four
cameras on it that are used for the
tracking of your head and the
controllers it also means that we can do
things like pass through video where we
had the pass through on gear VR
originally but it was a it was a small
insect window of like a 45 degree I am
horizontal field of view and it had a
lot of latency to it and it just it was
not that useful it took a second and a
half to start up so the idea of having
quick access buttons to use that it
wound up not being a particularly useful
feature but on quest the cameras are
running all the time because they're
doing the position tracking so we can
pull out the I am the images from that
and we can do it at a fairly low latency
I am great and we use this for the
guardians set up when you're kind of
initially setting up your play space
area in your safe space I am right now
we've got it doing largely a traditional
pass through which can be disorienting
because the cameras are not where your
eyes are they're down here and that
means that everything is offset a little
bit and feels at the wrong scale this is
something a lot of people figured out in
VR that you could use to an artistic
advantage when you change the the inner
pupillary distance of the cameras you
change the perceived scale of the world
and it's the whole like Alice growing or
shrinking effect when you can make
things feel like this is a tiny little
model versus something enormous and this
winds up hurting it even in some of the
like the very high-end professional one
a TV video that shot with like these big
red cameras they literally can't get
them close enough together to have the
proper IPD so a lot of people have
commented that it looks like they're
tiny people you know everybody is much
smaller than they should be because they
were kind of taken from a wider view but
we have a lot of Technology work going
on for ways that we can possibly make
this more comfortable where it's
understanding the world more than just
passing it through and there's a couple
different technology paths that
looking at some of which were we're
prototyping on more more powerful
headsets but they rely on either finding
features and getting depth from that or
looking at the video streams kind of
like the asynchronous space warp does
and taking motion vectors between them
and this is all bleeding edge right now
and not guaranteed to be shipping but
that's something that may wind up
improving the pass-through experience
there quite a bit I we have another
internal research project to try and do
pass-through what would be the best
pass-through we could do if that was a
primary goal where it's clearly a
secondary goal on quest where they are
there for the position tracking and for
the controller tracking that we can use
them for other things is sort of a side
benefit although there is one aspect of
that that I'm happy that I stood firm on
at the beginning where the initial
thought was for maximum robustness in
tracking and for maximum tracking of
your controllers you really would want
all four of them pointing out yet I kind
of pointing away from each other because
you can catch more of the wall over
there there's a lot of the robustness
that we get with quest compared to
something like a solo or some of the
mixed reality headsets with two cameras
is that you can point at a blank wall
and it quest will still work well
because it's got other things pointing
you know up and down in other directions
it's a trade-off it costs more and
there's more complexity for doing I
doing the extra cameras but the the
thing that I pushed for was making sure
that at least two of the cameras covered
in stereo the field of view that you can
actually see they're much wider angle
than the 90 to 100 degree field of view
that that you get in VR but if we at
least overlap them on that then we've
got this ability to do some of these
depth estimations and the other thing
that we are working on internally is
like native hand tracking
completely separate from the controllers
right now it's you know it's really slow
it takes a lot of computing power but
it's at least theoretically possible
that we can make this work it's unlikely
to be a shipping feature on quest but we
can use this hardware platform to start
researching some of these things that
future systems will have kind of they
the power and ability to do real-time
so one of the other of course real
benefits of hand tracking is the idea
that you can use them in this emotive
social way that talking with your hands
in in meetings and social gatherings is
one of the the things that makes it so
much more interesting than a kind of
static fixed avatar and things like
spaces and a lot of the third-party
applications have been working on this
for a long time now all the ways that
given that six six positioning that you
can do really great things and I had the
argument with some of those people
internally where many of them did have
the view that it's just not worth even
trying this on a three-three system like
gear VR or go and I think some of them
have come around a little bit and that
venues and rooms are I art proving
valuable for many people but I am the
six six definitely lets you go you know
go the extra mile there now with social
obviously being a big focus I
realistically we've got the the issues
of concurrency and friend graph density
and all of these things but Facebook is
all about connecting the world that's
the mission there so it does mean I'm a
little bit out of step sometimes as the
champion of the power of isolation where
I really do think that one of the the
superpowers of VR is the ability to
isolate you often from your environment
that I used to talk about it how you're
respecting your media when you are just
in the VR space watching you know
watching the screen and there's nothing
else distracting you or I say it's like
headphones for your eyes where if you're
in a big messy Open Office situation
being annoyed by everybody if you could
put on a headset and be in a productive
work environment that's peaceful around
you that there's real value there and it
turns out there's real value for that
for training situations where I know
there are it is an issue getting people
to pay attention a lot of times to
things like safety briefings and while
people have immediately jumped to the
clockwork orange' vision of the the
peeled open eyelids of you know you are
forced to watch this eye there are real
legitimate values in putting somebody in
an environment where they only have one
thing that they can choose to
concentrate on
and I do think that's gonna be very
important for education eventually you
know we're not I you know we are not
making any great strides i pushing
forward with education but I think
clearly that's going to be one of the
really important things that VR winds up
making a difference on like I was in a I
am the last time I was out here for that
off-site but then I mentioned at the
beginning when I was flying back I was
in the hotel in the airport waiting
round lots of people making lots of
noise I was annoyed I put on my go and I
was in my Netflix room and I watched a
show and and it was great that is
exactly what VR was supposed to be for
now of course if you do that today in
reality you're sort of making a
spectacle out of yourself and I and it
was true that on the airplane I had
brought it out again and the person
across the aisle said what does it look
like in there and I wound up by showing
Henry and someone a DVR basketball
footage and they wound up going to
Amazon on the airplane Wi-Fi and
ordering a go like right there which is
pretty magical when you think about it
we really are living in the future that
we can do this so I but still we have
marching orders that social is one of
the most important things that I am that
we need to be working on we need to be
combating the isolation of VR and we
have a few of these wonderful asymmetric
games like keep talking and nobody
explodes and covert AI that is a lot of
fun to be able to play with one person
looking at a cellphone directing you
telling you to to do something but these
are very specific niche games and most
of the content library I doesn't have
anything like that but the VR mirroring
the new stuff to Casting to the phones
and eventually to the screens is going
to be a a wonderful wonderful thing for
that it makes it so much more fun to
have somebody using VR even if you're
just looking over their virtual shoulder
through them through the casting onto
the screen so I'm really excited about
that one of the interesting things that
when we were discussing.i mirroring and
some of the other things at one point
nuraghe had suggested that you know LCD
screens for low-end cell phones are
really dirt cheap we could kind of put
an LCD screen on the front of a headset
and you know it's like it would hurt
goes thermal dissipation and it's not
die there would be challenged with that
it's not a completely insane idea that
you could have a VR headset that just is
literally you could maybe tap chin turn
it on or off to show what's there show
googly eyes or something or some
animation if you don't want the actual
content shown but the idea of trying to
actively combat as a high order eye it
was one of your real goals saying we
want to make this less isolating we want
to bring more people into it so there
may be something you know along those
lines where the hardware actually starts
changing another thing I we have been
big on isolation we've done a couple
experiments where cutting things away so
that I could see keyboards for desktop
development and then some people cutting
everything away so that you can see all
the way out to the side so you can have
VR down and be kind of side I having a
conversation with a worker a co-worker
next to you so there may be other other
parts of the VR immersion space that are
still valuable for different reasons i
am i did not get something i talked
about last year a lot was this social
substrate of that vr shell was
originally designed so that any shell
application you're doing would be
immediately social naively without
having to do anything a lot of that work
was ongoing sort of into venues venues
wound up being a fork of shell hopefully
at some point we're able to merge them
back together again but development
necessities and team dynamics wound up
with that happening but right now we are
heavily focused on co watching in TV
which is the first case of this is
inside shell it's the shell application
and we're getting our act together with
how do you nicely invite friends and
avatars in and watch the same thing
directly and what I hope comes out of
this realistically we can look at the
number as this many people are gonna use
TV we are gonna do a bunch of
promotional stuff around it but the
overlap between people it's not gonna be
huge numbers of people that are
simultaneously watching this but if we
can find the kernel of a behavior a new
behavior that people didn't have before
I think that let go at $1.99 is cheap
enough that I think we will find people
that go out and buy a pair of gos not
because they care about VR at all but
because they want to be able to do
something with a loved one
that's across the country and this won't
necessarily be a groundswell of people
but if this is an activity that you do
for this reason not because it's VR not
because you're into VR or a technology
enthusiast but because you do want to
connect with someone else someone that
you care about that you are physically
separate from that we can take this this
mantra of defy distance and give you
that sense of social presence next to
someone else and have an experience a
mundane simple watching television
together experience but with some
feeling that you look over and they're
actually there
this will TV will be coming over to
quest as well so you'll have the the two
hands for the the better emotive
gestures and all the different presence
there the better head movement
positioning but it should also work out
quite well on go that sense of being
able to have the nicely spatialized
audio that sense that you are kind of
right next to someone if everything is
set up right it is another thing that
technically that I think we can make
some good progress on and that's the
voice latency across I across the the
social systems where it's funny now that
so many people are so young that they
don't remember original local analog
line phone calls where things were
immediate and instantaneous and how
jarring it really was as people adapted
to the latency and normal cell phone
conversations and we're in a position
where we can probably make most VoIP
conversations in VR across the internet
I much better latency than typical cell
phone conversations to give you a little
bit more of that sense of immediacy in
that that you're actually there next to
someone I am one of the other big topics
that I had last year was about all the
different video work and this is one
that I'm honestly pretty disappointed
that we weren't able to make more
progress on really nailing and moving
forward with immersive video and a lot
of it is because our relatively small
internal media team they just got pulled
from project to project where you can't
work on oculus video anymore you have to
work on oculus Gallery because we have
no other way to see a lot of this media
on go now you can't work on gallery
anymore you have to go work on TV
because Co watching is our you know our
current strategy for pushing forward the
social stuff
I am so for whatever reasons you know we
wound up not getting a lot of the things
that I was excited about like getting
perfect frame releases improving the
quality and the bit rates and
projections of all these different
things and there's an interesting new
wrinkle with this where with go being
able to run at 72 frames per second my
initial thought was that we should
switch to 60 frames per second when you
are i watching something that is either
60 year or 30 frames per second and then
stay at 72 frames per second if you were
out of 24 frames per second so it's this
exact either one two or three vertical
retraces between the video but by a
quirk of what we have the way things are
implemented right now if you have an mp4
file that only has I think four or less
channels of audio I it will play through
the video direct code kind of
specialized standalone code that I wrote
and it funnels everything through that
and that does do the switching down to
60 but if it's in another format like an
MKV then it winds up playing through the
standard video processing path which
does not switch down so I had somebody
contact me and say hey this same video I
play this one and it's flickering and it
took me a little while I first thought
he meant something really gratuitous
like black frame is coming in on
alternate frames or something but it
turned out that he really meant just
that one of them was playing at 60
frames per second that was a worst-case
video with lots of white all in the
corners but it was he was one of the
people that was fairly struck by that so
that was an interesting thought and now
I am I'm uncertain about what the right
thing to do there is which means will
probably wind up making it a setting
where if you've got a 60 frames per
second video you absolutely want to be
at 60 frames per second you want it to
be perfectly smooth because every little
drop destroys I'm that sense of
immersion like I look at this all the
time yesterday at the main keynote our
million dollar production for all of
this they're showing the thousands of
apps that are going by smoothly panning
glitch smooth glitch and this you know
this happens across the highest level of
professional video but I it matters much
more in VR I mean yes if it's just on
the screen that you're looking at people
kind of
the latency on voice people just kind of
say well videos like that nowadays but
it doesn't have to be you know we should
be striving to be better and 60 frames
per second locked free our video is one
of those magical things it still has all
the limits so don't turn your head like
this but I am when it's all done right
it is one of the very best things that
you know that we can do and that's one
of the the wins from this year was the
5k video streaming stun the view
dependent video streaming that I did for
the Henry release and my main goal on
that was I'm always talking about it
doesn't have to be like this or it
should be better so much of my my duties
are to provide these lighthouse
experiences to show people VR shell
shows you text doesn't have to be
unreadable it doesn't have to be
flickering shimmering and hard to read
you can do all of these things right and
it can look good
we don't need bigger displays or changes
in GPS or something you just need to do
it right and this was the same thing on
video where videos do not have to be
this kind of blurry mess that stutters
and I'm and just looks terrible you can
have something that looks really really
good and so Henry was basically doing
everything right with this 5k by 5k
video stereo 60 frames per second only
possible with this this extra bit of
technology and I was very happy that I
was allowed to open release this open
source I this is something that I'm
still grappling with a little bit trying
to make changes at Facebook where
Facebook is very serious about the
responsibility of open source they have
huge hugely important projects like
react that I am that tons and tons of
people rely on so the process there is a
mini page document about how to do open
source at Facebook which is involves
like who's signing up for maintaining
this over all of this period of time and
who's gonna be reviewing all these
different things and I'm used to just
saying here's some source code I hope
it's useful for somebody I am and it
looks like the magic words for doing
that is you know it's not an open-source
project these this is example code I
that we can bundle with other things so
I think I'm working out the path to be
able to do more of that hopefully in the
future because what I want to do is get
this eventually on github I where week
we can see updates because even since
the Henri release there I I I made some
additional updates for the Jurassic
world blue release they do Felix and
Paul do some interesting technical
things with that where it's not just an
equal wreck if you notice in most 3d
videos including Henry you look down and
if you've got proper depth perception it
looks kind of like you're sitting at a
giant bowl that it goes off to infinity
usually less of a problem for the skies
but you have to get rid of the depth I
am below you just because otherwise your
eyes try to cross and go backwards when
it sees past the pole so Felix and Paul
did something interesting in their
presentation to avoid that because you
can look down at the ground on blue and
it looks like it's at you know the right
depth so there were some changes along
the way for there like Henry had
everything fixed in this band in the
middle while we moved it down for
Jurassic Park because more of the stuff
is kind of below horizon level and the
ground looks good I know what I need to
do eventually is write a real GUI tool
that lets us adjust all of this
dynamically because I'm I have dear
Angelica encoded on this but we're still
I were not quite through the release
process on this and I learned even more
with that with all the hard brush
strokes that really showed out the the
transitions between the high detail and
low detail so I added some blending and
blending into the things so they don't
pop in and a bunch of these new lessons
that I am that I want to get out to
everybody but what I really want to do
is have this so that you could add
producer can go ahead and lay out the
360 and then lay out a timeline of the
entire video it's split into ten slices
you should be able to kind of push those
up or down to cover exactly the detail
you want for everything now that's not
something everybody's gonna want to do
but I hope that every Felix and Paul
video gets remastered like this and for
you know the amount of money that goes
into those productions spending a day I
kind of plus/minus ngey the details in
the right places is absolutely
worthwhile one of the other big wins on
the video side I you know posted for the
post go launch was getting 5k video
support I am on the go where for a long
time now we've had really since the I am
since s6 or certainly since s7 for
everything we've been able to decode 4k
60 video where you can do 4 K by 2k 60
frames per second now if you divide that
out it would seem that well that should
also allow us to do I am I'm 57 60 by
2880 at 30 frames per second it's the
same number of pixels most things are
kind of flexible like that and in fact
the Exynos chip sets could do that but
the Qualcomm chipsets stopped at 4k
maximum dimensions so I had been kind of
prodding the Qualcomm engineers or not
can we do anything about this it would
really help some people doing
professional video work I am some of the
workflows from the cameras I'd like this
is optimal for our screen resolution we
didn't need to go all the way up where
the screen resolution optimal is only 50
120 by 2560 5760 is more than you need
and can't even be a net negative even if
you're throwing all the bandwidth at it
and eventually they came around and it
was kind of funny I was throwing some
quotes at them for people I didn't
realize there was this a community where
there are fanboy I've wars between
chipsets on mobile phones and I didn't
realize that was a thing but I would
find Exynos people ragging on the
Qualcomm chipsets about they can't even
play these videos that I've been able to
play for a while I'm there and I brought
all of those to Qualcomm his attention
and eventually they did I and it turned
out to be more work than I thought I I
had mistakenly thought they don't you
just have to change a consonant there
that I thought they were just saying
well the spec only goes up to here this
is all we're gonna do kind of a
conservative viewpoint but they did
actually have to reorder TechEd some
non-trivial things to to make it work
but it does work and it's out there
right now so I'm you can I you can play
these we have a quirky set of
restrictions for the way this works
right now this new technology this new I
am limit was only unlocked for h.264 so
if you want to play a 5k video it means
you want to be an h.264 h.265 can't play
wider than 5k but it can play taller
than 5k so you get into the point well
if you've got a you know a two to one
aspect ratio you can translate it I or
you can transpose it vertically and then
play it like that but then you need to
make sure that the player has a little
something different there someone
related to that something that I
discovered this year was that I it's
possible to interleave frames on stereo
instead of doing top bottom or left
right if you do interleaved frames h.265
especially when you've got the very slow
preset and it's looking across lots of
frames for motion vectors that gave a
startlingly high compression ratio like
over 30% better which is probably all
you ever would have gotten with the old
multi-view coating that was made for 3d
TVs which is not supported on the
current chipsets but no video player
right now plays interleaved you have to
do some extra buffering and work through
that but that's that's an interesting
thing I and one cool thing that was
great for Henry and some of these other
5k high-quality things we had an
internal research prototype that was a
gear vr headset but with some research
lenses that gave it like 120 they were
huge lenses like 120 degree field of
view eye that used you could put in one
of the larger Samsung phones that have
the wider aspect ratio and it would use
all of the extra pixels there and at
first when I heard about that I thought
that it would be bad because I thought I
know stretching the same number of
pixels across the wider field of view
really kills things in the middle and is
bad for it but the way the optics worked
on this the middle stayed about the same
resolution it just went all the way out
to the edges and scrunched those pixels
a little bit and looking at these 5k
videos inside that was pretty damn
impressive we showed that to Samsung is
like here's something that maybe we
could consider this for her future
device but it would have more
manufacturing challenges and so on but
but it was great to see the high-end VR
videos there um I am running out of time
so let me skip down to some other stuff
I am the I one of the other major
projects that I did this last year was
doing some work on remote desktop work
where everybody's seen let's just
project your PC screen into VR you can
do it directly with - you can do it -
mobile with a number of different apps
that have taken a stab at this but I am
it's really at least for productivity
stuff every programmers say I can't wait
till I can program in VR it's really
kind of a
Micke thing the way it's generally been
seen and the way I presented it
internally is that I am our current
resolution in our systems we Envy our
shell we recommend 13 pixels per degree
for display
you can actually go a little bit higher
than that but we use that so that as
you're going vertically where it's not
curved it doesn't fall off and aeleus so
soon and if you run those numbers out
even a 1280 by 720 monitor is is
enormous it's an IMAX screen and you're
spending all of your time looking side
to side but I had been saying internally
one of my pitches was we have a high-end
research going on about using the
cameras to be able to look at your
keyboard to be able to kind of see that
track other objects track your keyboard
and mouse through the VR display but I
had been saying for a long time just
let's cut out the bottom of it so you
can look under like I'm looking under my
glasses right now it's like yes
sometimes you wish that you could look
down straight through it but you can get
a lot done like that and we had been
talking about the future of work and the
pitches that we should be doing as this
strategic direction in the future but
eventually I said well I'm just gonna go
do this right now we had somebody some
of our hardware people chopped up a
bunch of a bunch of goes we tried a
number of different things ranging from
a small cut just for the keyboard to
cutting away most of the bottom and
since then we've had people cut away
everything so you could have the kind of
co-worker vision and then I started
working on writing a custom application
to do the remote desktop work before
that one of the things that I did try
but I'd been meaning to for a while was
seeing what we could get in terms of
super resolution because the idea that
the way desktop monitors work LCDs is
you have red green blue pixels and high
quality text rendering like ClearType
and I and other technologies like that
they wind up rasterizing things at this
sub pixel level so even if you say
you've got a 2560 resolution monitor
it's really three times that in the
horizontal direction and that does help
pretty significantly with text rendering
so for a long time I had been
considering trying to do that on on gear
VR initially and then go it's like is
there a 3x factor of resolution that we
can unlock somehow and it turned out I
it can't really be done like that for
something
wasn't immediately obvious we're for it
to work out you would have to have your
chromatic aberration correction accurate
to a third of a pixel or at least less
than a pixel for it to be valuable
because if the pixels the colors have
spread out further over there and you're
saying I'm expecting it to be here but
it winds up here it's not really extra
resolution and while it's plausible that
we could I we could generate a
correction curve that has that level of
accuracy the reality is that people
never put the headset on in exactly the
same position and while our chromatic
aberration correction looks really good
it's a great improvement right now it is
not one third of a pixel accurate and
you can see if you just move the headset
around tilt it around a little bit
things are moving around a little bit
you'll see a hint of a fringe coming on
one edge than the other so that was not
a key to new resolution but something I
learned that was completely new that I
had never suspected was I had for my
test for this I had a resolution chart
just things with expanding bands and I
am you know in horizontal and vertical
lines and I chose it so it was high
enough resolution that it was aliasing
pretty badly so it had all the
physically edges that I hate on things
and I noticed by accident that if I
tilted my head somehow it seemed to get
very crisp and it lost the aliasing
edges and it looked really good like
this is interesting this is a novel
effect and I did some experimenting with
it and it does turn out that in many
scenes that have like horizontal and
vertical lines that are lining up with
the display pixels a lot of times the
aliasing comes in from rasterizing to
that there's Storting it and then
showing it at the screens so in some
cases there is a there is a win to be
had by rotating your eye buffers and I
considered maybe making this a default
option I am but for every rotation
there's gonna be something in the world
that lines up with that and then I shows
what the current horizontal and vertical
ones do but there may be cases where
this is an interesting technology that
can actually have some value but so I
wanted not getting any any spectacular
wins for the the resolution there but I
started off with a basic virtual desktop
kind of a VNC RDP protocol
I took my desktop machines
up in there got the mouse cursor working
which was kind of interesting where when
I first you can plug in a lot of I'm you
can get somewhat some bluetooth mouse
and keyboards to work you can actually
pair some of them through Twilight I am
its hit or miss we don't we don't
exactly have a list of supported devices
you can also take the little USB RF
dongles and just kind of plug that into
the micro USB and then use their
keyboard and mouse so there's a number
of ways to get keyboard and mouse
working and with the cutout there you
can see it reasonably well so I took the
remote desktop and I did my normal kind
of VR shell route of I put it on a nice
cylindrical layer I am at the
recommended resolutions and it's
enormous and I do some work going on one
of the first things I noticed was that I
am while the cylindrical curve works
great for that axes vertically it's
still just a flat projection and
eventually you run out of resolution but
you also then start running into our
limited distortion mesh where you start
seeing things get a little bit Wiggly
down at the bottom and if you look
really carefully you can see this even
in some conventional apps like I've
spent so much time in the Netflix scene
that I noticed that the table in front
of you with the magazine's there that's
down near the bottom of my vision as I
you know move around a little bit I can
see the distortion kind of wiggling
those pixels but very few people will be
able to notice something like that it
does show up also in equal rect
presentations where some of that at a
certain point there's an area where you
see those getting a little bit Wiggly so
one of the things I had to do quality
wise to make the desktop work better was
to make I was to increase the density of
the distortion mesh and that cleaned up
the Wiggles on there and will probably
make that some kind of a performance
option probably a flag on layers at some
point for people to use I'm but the
thing that was really important was
giving up on this 13 or 14 pixels per
degree and say well we've got in my case
I was streaming like a 5 cave pair of
desktop monitors I let's go ahead and
take all of that and let me shrink it
down and spend spread it out and use
some pre filtering technology to say we
know what resolution it's going to be
we've got the high-res let's filter it
down not just with a mipmap where you're
just factors of 2 and you're either 2
aliased or 2 blurry or blended between
them
but to actually filter it correctly for
the resolution that it was going to be
and then the key was having a really
fast I expressive way of panning around
this desktop so I made it so that touch
shift on the keyboard and I could move
the mouse around it could pan the whole
desktop around and mouse wheel would
zoom it in and out so at that point I
could actually get some real work done I
would start the start the day put on my
go I bring up Visual Studio and Eudora
and I'd start working out or out looking
and start working on things I am and it
was the first day I'm working on this
and one hour later my eyes are just
hurting yeah I it's the strain of kind
of looking at things at this distance
I'm you know and it was bothersome I
found that if I pushed everything out to
I into like 32 meters in the great
distance that worked a lot better and I
was comfortable for another hour I got
all of them the desktop stuff so I could
really do my work well I was thinking
some things they're saying we're done
right now okay well we can continue out
in the hall anybody that wants okay
thank you everyone
all right